---
layout: post
title: "Contour-guided Image Completion with Perceptual Grouping"
author: "Chandra Gummaluru"
categories: research
---

<br>
Humans are excellent at perceiving illusory outlines. We are readily able to complete contours, shapes, scenes, and even unseen objects when provided with images that contain broken fragments of a connected appearance. In vision science, this ability is largely explained by perceptual grouping: a foundational set of processes in human vision that describes how separated elements can be grouped. In this paper, we revisit an algorithm called Stochastic Completion Fields (SCFs) that mechanizes a set of such processes -- good continuity, closure, and proximity -- through contour completion. This paper implements a modernized model of the SCF algorithm, and uses it in an image editing framework where we propose novel methods to complete fragmented contours. We show how the SCF algorithm plausibly mimics results in human perception. We use the SCF completed contours as guides for inpainting, and show that our guides improve the performance of state-of-the-art models. Additionally, we show that the SCF aids in finding edges in high-noise environments. Overall, our described algorithms resemble an important mechanism in the human visual system, and offer a novel framework that modern computer vision models can benefit from.

<script src="//mozilla.github.io/pdf.js/build/pdf.mjs" type="module"></script>

<script type="module">
  // If absolute URL from the remote server is provided, configure the CORS
  // header on that server.
  var url = 'https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.11322';

  // Loaded via <script> tag, create shortcut to access PDF.js exports.
  var { pdfjsLib } = globalThis;

  // The workerSrc property shall be specified.
  pdfjsLib.GlobalWorkerOptions.workerSrc = '//mozilla.github.io/pdf.js/build/pdf.worker.mjs';

  var pdfDoc = null,
      pageNum = 1,
      pageRendering = false,
      pageNumPending = null,
      scale = 3,
      canvas = document.getElementById('the-canvas'),
      ctx = canvas.getContext('2d');

  /**
   * Get page info from document, resize canvas accordingly, and render page.
   * @param num Page number.
   */
  function renderPage(num) {
    pageRendering = true;
    // Using promise to fetch the page
    pdfDoc.getPage(num).then(function(page) {
      var viewport = page.getViewport({scale: scale});
      canvas.height = viewport.height;
      canvas.width = viewport.width;

      // Render PDF page into canvas context
      var renderContext = {
        canvasContext: ctx,
        viewport: viewport
      };
      var renderTask = page.render(renderContext);

      // Wait for rendering to finish
      renderTask.promise.then(function() {
        pageRendering = false;
        if (pageNumPending !== null) {
          // New page rendering is pending
          renderPage(pageNumPending);
          pageNumPending = null;
        }
      });
    });

    // Update page counters
    document.getElementById('page_num').textContent = num;
  }

  /**
   * If another page rendering in progress, waits until the rendering is
   * finised. Otherwise, executes rendering immediately.
   */
  function queueRenderPage(num) {
    if (pageRendering) {
      pageNumPending = num;
    } else {
      renderPage(num);
    }
  }

  /**
   * Displays previous page.
   */
  function onPrevPage() {
    if (pageNum <= 1) {
      return;
    }
    pageNum--;
    queueRenderPage(pageNum);
  }
  document.getElementById('prev').addEventListener('click', onPrevPage);

  /**
   * Displays next page.
   */
  function onNextPage() {
    if (pageNum >= pdfDoc.numPages) {
      return;
    }
    pageNum++;
    queueRenderPage(pageNum);
  }
  document.getElementById('next').addEventListener('click', onNextPage);

  /**
   * Asynchronously downloads PDF.
   */
  pdfjsLib.getDocument(url).promise.then(function(pdfDoc_) {
    pdfDoc = pdfDoc_;
    document.getElementById('page_count').textContent = pdfDoc.numPages;

    // Initial/first page rendering
    renderPage(pageNum);
  });
</script>

<canvas style="outline:solid;width:100%;" id="the-canvas"></canvas>
<div style="text-align:center;margin:auto;">
  <button style="margin: 0px 0px 50px 50px;" id="prev">&#8592;</button>
  <span style="font-size:0.8em;"><span id="page_num"></span> of <span id="page_count"></span></span>
  <button style="margin: 0px 0px 50px 50px;" id="next">&#8594;</button>
</div>

